In this lesson,
you will learn how to create a budget that aligns with your work plan.
People who have been doing this for a while will tell
you that these 2 things — the work plan and the budget —
are often done at the same time in a single step.
However, in order to help you learn how to do each of these tasks well,
we’ve separated them.
Creating a budget involves 3 main tasks:
analyzing the available information,
forecasting the budget requirements,
and submitting your proposed budget.
Analyzing means taking a good look at
last year’s work plan and financial reports.
If you have access to previous years,
it’s a good idea to look at those,
as well as the current financials, new initiatives,
context and priorities for your organization.
Forecasting means estimating costs
and identifying costs that may change significantly over the fiscal year.
Once your budget requirements are complete,
submit your proposed budget to upper management.
It will then be moved up to the departmental level.
You may be asked to make adjustments before final approval.
Ready to dive further into each of these steps?
Great! Just before we do that, though, let’s take a moment
to learn how the government financial cycle works,
so that you can tie it in with your own work as a manager.
Let’s look at how you create your budget requirements
in the larger context of the financial cycle of the Government of Canada.
The government fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
Some activities exist at both the government-wide level
and at the organizational level.
Key activities happen in preparation for the next fiscal year,
others happen during the fiscal year,
and other activities occur after the year has ended.
As a manager, you’re building your work plan and budget requirements
for the next fiscal year in the fall.
You could be responsible for a new program being established through
a budget proposal
or a memorandum to Cabinet.
These are discussed in the financial committee
pre-budget consultations.
When the new program is announced in the federal budget,
you would then need to prepare a Treasury Board submission,
and seek approval to access the funding.
To start off the fiscal year, there’s an interim supply,
which provides the initial funding to kick off the year.
This is usually three-twelfths of your budget.
You’ll get this while waiting for Parliament to approve the full supply.
Now where do you fit in?
Your work plan feeds into your organization’s Departmental Plan.
And your budget moves up into the main estimates,
which present the resources allocated to each organization
to fulfill its mandate and cover its priorities
for the coming fiscal year.
Full supply is based on the main estimates
and gets approved around the end of June.
From the moment full supply has been approved,
starting budgets are made official for each department.
Budgets are formalized into departmental financial systems,
and business plans are reflected in the performance agreements
of managers and employees.
Parliament can grant additional spending powers during the year,
through supplementary estimates.
They have an impact on your department,
which may affect your budget.
You spend the money in your budget throughout the year.
This eventually makes its way, at a higher level,
into the Public Accounts of Canada.
Towards the end of the year,
you will be asked for information on the results you achieved
on the activities in your work plan.
This becomes part of your organization's Departmental Results Report.
And by then,
you will already be starting your work plan and
budget requirements for the next fiscal year.
Now that you have a better sense of the financial
cycle of the Government of Canada,
and how it relates to your work as a manager,
let’s go back to our analyze-forecast-submit workflow
to create a budget.
The more often you do this, the more accurate your budget will be.
Don’t worry, your ability to make precise forecasts will
increase with experience. You got this!
In the following activity, you will look at the key terms regarding budgets.
You’re now familiar with the key terms.
You will have a chance to create your proposed budget
by using information
from last year and this year.
Click on any question marks you see and a question will appear.
Once you’ve answered it,
the correct figure will appear in the budget.
After getting all the information you can from
last year’s and the current year’s budget,
you find that you still need to forecast some budget requirements.
Let’s continue creating your proposed budget.
Click on any question marks you see and a question will appear.
Once you’ve answered it, the correct figure will appear in the budget.
You’re now ready to submit your budget to your director.
You may be asked to explain assumptions you made,
how your figures were estimated,
and how your budget will allow you to fulfil your priorities.
Always keep in mind that your expenditures must stay in line
with the departmental mandate and priorities.
If your director asks about costs,
the budget notes in your “back pocket”
will remind you how you reached them.
You may need to make adjustments before you get final approval.
During the meeting, if your director asks you to adjust your budget,
you may also need to update your work plan.
You may not have enough budget in O&M but find
that you could move that amount over from Salary.
Though not common,
you can convert some funds from Salary to O&M,
or vice versa.
You just need to factor in the
Employee Benefit Plan — or EBP — amount in your calculations.
For example, some departments use 27% for the EBP.
This means that $100,000 in Salary
equals $127,000 in O&M.
Or vice versa.
Talk to your financial management advisor
if you think this might be something you need to do.
You may need other funding sources in your budget to
cover the priorities in your work plan.
Here are a few more examples of what you could do:
Get extra money from other managers,
use an untapped surplus your director might have.
Depending on the department, some reserves are kept at the DG,
ADM or departmental level.
Or, submit a Treasury Board Submission or memorandum to Cabinet.
A Treasury Board Submission is a document used to seek
Treasury Board approval
for a program-execution strategy
and/or funding authorities
for an initiative that the organization would otherwise
not be able to undertake
or that is outside its delegated authorities.
For more information, look in the toolbox.
A memorandum to Cabinet
is used at any time of the year by ministers who wish to consult
with their ministerial colleagues in Cabinet
and reach a Cabinet decision.
For more information, look in the toolbox.
In case you’re wondering what an interdepartmental settlement is,
it refers to a transfer of funds between any two departments
or agencies that operate within the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
Examples are: language testing performed by the
Public Service Commission,
or translation by the Translation Bureau within Public Services
and Procurement Canada.
In the following activity, you will adjust your proposed budget.
Let’s bring what you have learned into real life.
Your organization will have their own ways of
responding to budget requirements.
Take time out from the course
and talk to your financial management advisor and director.
Ask them the following questions:
Do we have a budget template?
What budgets do we have?
For example, operating budgets, which includes Salary and O&M,
Grants and Contributions, or Gs&Cs,
and Capital.
And finally, ask if the capital budget is managed
centrally or by each manager.
We’re at the end of this lesson on how to create a budget!
Take a few moments to answer the following questions
to see what you remember!